# ACNE
Absolute Copy Number Estimation using low-coverage whole genome sequencing data

This readme only contains an executive summary of ACNE. You can try reading the paper for more background on the "why", this readme has more info on the "what" and "how" of the code.

ACNE is a an absolute copy number estimator that scales copy number data to fit with integer copy numbers. For this it uses segmented data from the QDNAseq package, which in turn uses a number of dependencies. Note: make sure QDNAseq fetches the bin annotations from the same genome build as the one used for aligning the sequencing data! On with ACNE! In brief: ACNE will run QDNAseq or use its output rds-file of segmented data. It will subsequently run through all samples in the object(s), for which it will create individual subdirectories. For each sample, it will calculate how well the segments fit (the relative error) to integer copy numbers for each percentage of "tumor cells" (cells with divergent segments). Note that it does not estimate for a lower percentage than 5. ACNE will output a graph with relative errors (all errors relative to the largest error). Said graph can be used to quickly identify the most likely fit. ACNE selects all "minima" and saves the corresponding copy number plots. The "best fit" (lowest error) is not by definition the most likely fit! ACNE will run models for a general tumor ploidy of 2N, but you can expand this to include any ploidy of your choosing. The program needs to make one assumption: the median bin segment value corresponds with the tumor's general ploidy. If none of the fits are to your liking, there are several functions to help you out. Most of it is covered in the walkthrough.

### ACNE has arrived!
There are currently eight functions: acne, ploidyplotloop, ObjectsampleToTemplate, singlemodel, singleplot, getadjustedsegments, linkmutationdata, postanalysisloop, analyzegenomiclocations. I have also added the "multiplot" function for making summary sheets.

acne takes a folder with rds-files (default, make sure all are segmented) or bam-files and returns plots for the most likely errors in convenient subfolders. In case of bam-files it will run binsizes 30, 100, 500 and 1000 kbp as default, but a vector of desired binsizes can be used as input. Binsizes available are 1, 5, 10, 15, 30, 50, 100, 500, and 1000 kbp. Note that output will be larger and programs will run longer with the smaller binsizes (1 kbp is pretty hardcore). 
ploidies specifies for which ploidies fits will be made: default is 2 but you can input a vector with all desired ploidies, e.g. c(2,4). 
\bBeggers be choosers! acne likes pdf-files, but for large datasets or small binsizes you might want to go with 'png'. 
\bA standard method for error calculation is the root mean squared error (RMSE), but you can argue you should actually punish more the long segments that are a little bit off compared to the short segments that are way off. 'MAE' weighs every error equally, whereas 'SMRE' does the latter; these will generally generate more fits (I see that as a downside), but it is more likely that the segments of which you are sure are sticking tighter to the integer ploidy in the best fit. 
\bThe parameter "penalty" sets a penalty for the error calculated at lower cellularity: errors are divided by the cellularity to the power of the penalty: default = 0 (no penalty). Adding a penalty (0.5 is usually decent) comes at a cost. At high cellularities it has reduced precision (especially when minima are not sharp). And to state the obvious: you don't want to penalize fits at low \bcellularities when you expect them (e.g. you know your samples have a very low tumor cell percentage).
\bFunctionality for large data sets (many samples!): fits will always have to be chosen manually, but you can open the file with all errorlists to pick the most likely fit without looking at the copy number profile. Use the generated tab-delimited file to fill in the column with the likely fit. 
\btrncname (truncate name) which truncates the name to everything before the first instance of _ - set TRUE if applicable, or specify regular expression, e.g. "-.*" to REMOVE everything after and including the first dash found in a sample name. 
\bprintsummaries: superbig summary files may crash the program, so you can set this argument to FALSE, or 2 if you still want the error plots

ploidyplotloop is the meat of acne, and it can be run as a separate function as well. It takes a QDNAseq-object as input and also needs a folder to write the files to. This function is particularly handy if you want to analyze a whole QDNAseq-object that is already loaded in your R environment.

ObjectsampleToTemplate is pretty much there to parse QDNAseqobjects into the dataframe structure used by the singlemodel and singleplot functions. These latter functions call ObjectsampleToTemplate itself when necessary, but it can be handy to make a template if you expect some repeated use of the functions or if you want to make the template and then do your own obscure manipulations to it (you know you want to!)

singlemodel: like the name implies it runs the fitting algorithm on a single sample and spits out the info you want! Not strictly necessary to save it to a variable, but that might still be handy. It returns a list with the model parameters, data, and errorplot. singlemodel comes with the awesomeness of manual input: you can restrain the model to the ploidy you expect (default 2, but hey, ploidy 5 happens, right?) and you can tell the program if you think there is a different standard (this should only be necessary when the median segment happens to be a subclonal variant; very rare).

singleplot: again, you already know what it does! It again offers an extra degree of customization, for instance to change the chart title, the error, choose a subset of chromosomes, limit the y-axis. Don't believe the cellularities the program calculated for you? You don't have to! Just fill in the cellularity you believe to be true, and singleplot will take your word for it! Note: if you wish to make more aesthetic changes to your plots, you can consider copying the function code, rename the function, and change whatever you want to. An example of this is customplot.R, which is added to this GitHub.

getadjustedsegments: get info of the actual segments in a handy dataframe! Contains start and end location, "number of probes" (number of bins supporting the segment value), value of the segment (Segment_Mean is the value from QDNAseq, Segment_Mean2 is calculated from adjustedcopynumbers within the segment), and the nearest ploidy with the chance (log10 p-value) that the segment has this ploidy. A very low p-value indicates a high chance of subclonality, although this value should be approached with extreme caution (and is at the moment not corrected for multiple testing).

linkmutationdata: now we're talking! Give a tab-delimited file with mutation data, and this function will tell you what the copy number is at that genomic location, and it will guess how many copies are mutant! Read more about the options for this function in the code.

postanalysisloop: you've run acne, you've picked your models, you have your mutation data ... Now if you could only ... say no more! this function combines the power of all above functions and your own brain (you still choose the models). Only for the brave of heart.

analyzegenomiclocations: a sort of simplified version of linkmutationdata, you can manually input a single genomic location as specified by chromosome and position. You can also input multiple locations using vectors of the same length. The output will be a dataframe. You can also enter frequencies to quickly calculate mutant copies, but then you also need to enter cellularity! Note: the function requires the dataframe with adjusted segments (output of getadjustedsegments). Obviously, you should enter the same cellularity as you've used for the getadjustedsegments function.

There are some more snippets of advice in the code. For a walkthrough ... try the walkthrough! 

That's pretty much it for now, let me know if you run into some errors or oddities j.poell@vumc.nl

